# Agriculture
* Modern agriculture is highly connected with climate change, particularly: practices dependent on fossil fuels, land usage and deforestation, chemical sprays (herbicides, fungicides, fertilizers, etc.), transportation/refrigeration/packaging/retail [Lovins, 178][Lovins]

## Organic farming
* In theory, healthy plants don't need pesticides. Pests typically attack stressed plants. [Barber, 53][Barber]
* Weeds don't matter if they are not competing with the primary plant. Make conditions optimal for the plant you want and you might get "weeds" but you won't have a weed problem (they will become the stressed plant) [Barber, 57][Barber]
* You can identify the needs of the soil by the types of weeds that grow there
* Grazing animals seek varied and nutritious diets. That's why you see them reaching through fencelines. [Barber, 61][Barber]
* Weeds will grow where the soil is best suited to them. You can use the weeds to identify soil needs: chicory, Queen Anne's lace, and wild carrot grow where there is low fertility. Milkweed shows low zinc. Wild garlic and yellow flowers mean there is low sulfur. [Barber, 57-58, 65][Barber]
* Crop rotation example (no fertilizer needed): Spelt builds deep root systems and creates soil aeration. Clover captures nitrogen from the air and fixes it in the soil and carbon from the process keeps the nitrogen stable so it doesn't run off like chemical fertilizer. [Barber, 63][Barber]
* Soil management - nutrients, minerals, fertilizer content- create the end taste of the crop [Barber, 68][Barber]
* Plant flavor can be measured with a refractometer to find Brix, which has enormous impact on food flavor. Commonly used with wine grapes. [Barber, 81][Barber]
* Monocultures make entire crops susceptible to disease - all or nothing [Barber, 82][Barber]
* "The overproduction of grain helps enable the overproduction of chicken, which lowers the price of chicken, which means even more chickens are raised to make up for declining revenue. That leads to even more unneeded chicken [the parts that aren't breasts and thighs]. So it's fed to other animals it probably shouldn't be fed to, like fish (which are increasingly farm-raised, in part due to the offshore pollution caused by producing too much grain)." [Barber, 157][Barber]
* Our food systems were originally driven by what the land could produce; it's now driven by what eaters want to consume - which leads to a lot of wasted animal parts when we only buy the choicest cuts [Barber, 156][Barber]
* Aquaculture raised fish: to get one to market weight quickly enough to turn a profit, you have to feed it 2-5x its weight in wild fish [Barber, 235][Barber]
* We moved to monocultures through the work of Norman Borlaug, who bred quick-maturing grains in the 1950s and 1960s to combat world hunger - and it worked; an estimated 1 billion lives were saved from starvation worldwide [Barber, 364][Barber]
* Quick-maturing grains produce shallow root structures, so they don't build the soil in the same way as their predecessors (no deep aeration among other things) and also are more sensitive to drought - government money has gone into huge irrigation projects since 1950 (irrigated farmland has tripled from 1950-2000). [Barber, 365][Barber]
* "According to author and activist Vandana Shiva, India's water crisis is clearly linked to the introduction of Borlaug's green revolution varieties. 'Although high-yielding varieties of wheat may yield over 40 percent more than traditional varieties,' she writes, 'they need about three times as much water.'" [Barber, 365][Barber]
* "With a billion lives at stake, the single-minded pursuit of yield is both defensible and important. But what if, all along, our math has been wrong? What if, in our mad dash for greater productivity, we've miscalculated the *true* yields? ¶ Consider the farmer who grows a variety of semidwarf wheat. He applies the requisite chemical fertilizers and sits back, with hopes of watching his yields (and profit) soar. But shorter straw means less to plow back into the ground to become food for soil organisms. Or, if the wheat is being used as food and bedding for cattle, dwarfed straw means there's less feed for the cow. Either way, it amounts to less food for someone. And not just anyone. As Klaas liked to remind me, soil organisms and cows are partners in making a healthy system work. In the modern calculus of efficient farming, those things are left out of the equation because they're not feeding our bellies (at least not directly). And it's a critical omission." [Barber, 366][Barber]
* Growing a monoculture with fertilizers will win on quantity of yield over an unfertilized organic version of the same grain. But in the organic version, you can plant oat and barley along with your wheat, which yields more overall food yield than the monoculture wheat crop - if you harvest and eat them, which we currently don't. [Barber, 367][Barber]

{% include "../bibliography.md" %}
